Explanation of Login Security Update

1. What the system originally did

Originally, the login system:
Stored passwords in plain text inside the database (e.g., 12345)
Compared the typed password directly in SQL:
SELECT * FROM Users WHERE username='$username' AND password='$password'
This approach is insecure because:
If the database is compromised, attackers can see all real passwords.
It is vulnerable to SQL injection attacks.
It does not follow modern password security standards.

2. What I changed

To improve security, I updated the login system to:
Store hashed passwords instead of plain text
Use PHP’s password_hash() to generate secure hashes
Use password_verify() to validate passwords
Use prepared statements to prevent SQL injection

3. How hashed passwords were generated

To generate secure password hashes, I used PHP’s built-in function:
password_hash("12345", PASSWORD_DEFAULT);
This function:
Uses a strong one-way hashing algorithm (currently bcrypt by default)
Automatically generates a random salt
Produces a long hash string (around 60 characters)
Returns a value that looks like:
$2y$10$rSIpiZAfT.4W6dekETVDveFyB3/R1O4Mjh12gWdZM/ZFurWhLbzz.
I generated hashes for each user’s password and replaced the plain-text values in the database with these hashed strings.

4. How password validation now works

Instead of comparing passwords directly, the system now:
Retrieves the stored hashed password from the database.
Uses:
password_verify($password, $stored_hash)
password_verify():
Takes the user’s typed password
Hashes it internally using the same algorithm and salt
Compares it securely to the stored hash
Returns true if they match
Because hashing is one-way, the original password cannot be retrieved from the stored hash. It can only be verified.

5. Why this works and is secure

This approach is secure because:
Even if the database is compromised, attackers only see hashed values.
The hashing algorithm includes a random salt, so identical passwords produce different hashes.
password_verify() handles algorithm consistency automatically.
Prepared statements prevent SQL injection attacks.
This follows modern best practices for password storage and authentication in PHP.

Final Result

The updated login system now:
Stores passwords securely using hashing
Validates passwords using password_verify()
Prevents SQL injection using prepared statements
Meets modern password security standards
